{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12600\viewh13120\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Vocab:\
- Roman Spain\
 - The Romans imposed government and culture on Spain \
  - Most important of the ancient periods - as Renaissance was reviving Roman culture/governance/institutions in Iberia\
 - Hispania, Roman province name => Spain\
 - Full Roman colonization begins well after Punic War - actually about 197 to 19 BC romans exploit Iberia for silver\
  - Augustus Caesar ends up making Spain a major Roman colony \
 - Spain becomes one of the most important provinces\
  - Merida - major Roman city\
  - Roman Engineering - Aqueduct of Sequoia \
  - peripheries create important people - major emperors, Trajan and Hadrian, born in Spain \
   - Spanish take pride in this, example of the political/military culture of Rome, as Iberia was a major part of the Empire\
 - Romans brought Christianity to Spain, with Constantine making it the official religion and then Theodosius banning paganism\
   - Bishop of Cordoba was on the Council of Nicaea - signify power of Christianity in Spain\
 - Roman period also a time of cultural and artistic growth + politics/law/infrastructure\
  - Latin remained main language for years to come\
  - 600 year occupation -> foundational moment of later Spain, and most of Spanish future.\
\
Altamira - caves opened for research - painting of bulls representing ancient culture and struggle in Iberia \
- Mythos of the bull still alive in Spain\
- Well before writing - starts in 1200 BC\
\
Great Mosque of Cordoba - Cordoba was the seat of Umayyad power, center of Islamic authority. It was everything Western Europe wasn\'92t, with a massive library, domed building, education, wealth, revival of ancient knowledge, political centralization. This Mosque was a symbol of Islamic wealth in a Europe that was regressing. \
\
Convivencia - A period from the Umayyad conquest of Hispania to Ferdinand and Isabella\'92s expulsion of the Jews in 1492, where religious diversity thrived, as compared to the later period, where Catholicism was imposed forcibly upon the subjects of Spain. It played a major role in the revival of Greek/Roman learning later, and its fall is linked to the rise of the spanish empire, where tolerance is replaced with the inquisition. \
\
Taifa States - an Arab principality or emirate that formed in Al Andalus after the fall of the Umayyad Caliphate in the 11th century. Showed fragmentation of Islamic states in Spain, began the reconquista, as these were increasingly absorbed by the Christian kingdoms of the north until Granada, the final holdout, was conquered. \
\
Military orders acted as ways for young men to improve their social status. They were a tool of upwards mobility, and these orders would accept young men, train them, and then fight against the Islamic kingdoms of the south. Calatrava, Alcantara, Santiago. The Almoravids prop up the Taifa States of the South of Spain and engage with these military orders, but are pushed back, as the Christian Kingdoms gain land. But these kingdoms aren\'92t monoliths - there\'92s a lot of infighting. \
\
Council of the Mesta - the trail the shepherds took sheep across - signifies the }