{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww25400\viewh13060\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Gothic architecture becomes more prevalent than Romanesque - act as the large triumphal signs of the Christian reconquest. \
- Evolution of architectural styles as an allegory for christian concept\
\
-13th and 14th centuries: \
 - Fragmented Taifa Estates in the south, along with fragmented Christian North.\
 - Shows that Spain is finally becoming fully christian, and muslims are being pushed out of Spain. \
  - Still, lots of conquest and rivalry amidst the Christian kingdoms\
   - life of El Cid - fight between two brothers over the control of greater Castile \
   - Frequent treaties, civil war in the north and south\
 - Growing christian powers that are challenging each other\
 - 1230 - Castile and Leon merge into a single kingdom (first major consolidation of christian kingdoms)\
\
- Aragon - a strong sense of itself as the most Mediterranean of the Spanish kingdoms. \
 - Castile landlocked, Portugal atlantic. \
 - Aragon - carve out Mediterranean merchant empire - connections to Italy, tremendous wealth\
  - Continually push further south, brush up against others.\
 - Aragon/Castile/Portugal - \'93dynastic dance\'94 - try to build up power and territory through intermarriage and dynastic unions\
 - James I, 1213 - 1276, of Aragon (\'93James the Conqueror\'94) \
  - Conquest of the Balearic Islands from Islam (1229) \
  - Conquest of Valencia (1238)\
  - Serves as new bases for Mediterranean expansion. \
   - Happens alongside Marseilles/Genoa/Naples trying to create guilds (consulta) and \'93safe zones\'94 around the Mediterranean\
  - The importance of the maritime empire of the Aragon-ese is certainly economic, allowing for expansion and growth, along with political capital, but it also gives increasingly valuable maritime experience, as they learn to sail and travel \
    throughout the Mediterranean. Starting to build up a naval presence.\
 - Conquest of the islands along with Valencia led to writing of the \'93Book of Deeds\'94 [records James\'92 conquests\'94]\
  - The strength of an empire can be seen by the length of a monarch\'92s rule.\
  - Long lived monarchs show stability and power.\
 - Peter III - maintained his father\'92s conquests.\
  - Also established the first foothold of the Aragon-ese in Italy, on the island of Sicily. \
   - Sicily is the first connection to the peninsula.\
   - Emergence of Aragon as a regional power (conquests of Balearic islands recognized everywhere) \
   - Sicily also conquered by Islam in 9th centuries until Normans of 1100 - 1285. \
    - Normandy is the location of many mercenaries wanting land and power, and conquered a large part of southern Italy and Sicily. \
     - 1100 conquest of Calabria and Sicily\
     - Roger II - more remarkable kingdoms - Byzantine generals for navy, maritime presence, commerce, Arab accountants/tax collectors, Latin Monks\
      - Interesting, hybrid culture - Roger II fashioned himself as a would-be Byzantine Emperor. Wide reach and ambitions. \
   - Later 13th century in Sicily, monarchs weren\'92t ruling from Sicily - power vacuum.\
    - Easter morning, 1280s, Sicilian women on way to Mass - french soldiers disrespect honor. \
     - Begins a revolt - invite Peter III (of Aragon) to Sicily to be their king\
      - Hold on to this for a long time, eventually part of consolidated Spanish Empire, starting here. \
       - Nobility tires of Norman rule and voluntarily invites in Peter\
   - This was a major step: Aragon was, 50 years after fighting for borders, was strong enough to be invited into Sicily to protect their borders. \
 - What grows out of this 13th century Aragon is an increasingly romantic view about the future of Aragon-ese monarchs. \
  - Many fanciful prophecies about this period - one being that eventually the line of Aragon-ese monarchs gives birth to the \'93Hidden One\'94 - \'93encubierto\'94 who will restore the Roman Empire/christian rule over Jerusalem \
   - tradition grows and important when we get to period of Ferdinand and Isabella, takes major role in European futures\
\
- Castilian Expansion happening in parallel with the Aragon-ese growth in Mediterranean.\
 - Aragon has a frontier east, while the Castilians begin to push south, becoming spearhead of Reconquista\
 - Ferdinand III (1217-1252) - Conquers Cordoba definitively in 1236 by Castile, and will become a Castilian hold.\
  - 1248 - conquest of Seville (comparable to Aragon taking Valencia, as Seville is an important commercial center and major port city.\
   - Cosmopolitan city with merchants throughout the Mediterranean world - gateway to the New World, and becomes even wealthier in the 1450s\
 - Conquest of Cordoba and Seville mean that the kings of Castile can enrich themselves, due not only to cities, but taking of the nearby land (olive oil, wine, farms, fertile part of Spain)\
 - Guarantee to newly conquered Arab peoples that they will respect their traditional stations and religion (follow the tenets of Islam). \
  - Lasts for a few decades (lets natives submit to new authority), but by 1264, there are rebellions by Mudejar population\
   - Mudajar - Islamic subjects of Christian monarchs. (Mozarabes - Christians living under Islamic rule). \
   - This rebellion leads to the repartamiento - taking lands of the conquered and redistributing them to soldiers who fought in the reconquista. \
    - Encourages young men to fight, as there was land to be gained. Created new layer of nobility in the South. \
    - Larger, more ancient nobility of the South date their origins to this policy. \
  - Alfonso X (1252-1284) - Responsible for repartimiento (Alfonso the Wise) \
   - Cultured, first of monarchs to look back to Ancient Rome\
   - Wants to intermarry with the family of the Holy Roman Emperor, which doesn\'92t happen, but the grandson of Ferdinand and Isabella takes the Holy Roman Emperor title\
   - Establishes the most sophisticated law code of Medieval Spain (Siete Partidos - directly inspired by ancient Roman law) \
   - Has a History of Spain written - lots of rome in it.\
   - Wants to unite his entire kingdom to be speaking Castilian - all records in one language, language of law, language of history - vision of political unity\
   - Castile becomes largest kingdom on the Iberian Peninsula, and extremely powerful\
 - Between Ferdinand III and Alfonso XI is a period of tremendous expansion of the Castilians.\
  - Sancho IV (1284 - 1295) - protector of many Islamic Kingdoms, including Taifa Estates of Granada, protect them against the Almoravids of Morocco. \
   - Emirs of Granada pay a large tribute to Sancho IV\
  - Alfonso XI (1312-1350) - Push reconquista to Gibraltar, into Saladar (1340) - making almost the entirety of central Iberia controlled by a single law code, Sieta Parotids\
  - By 1350, Iberia is almost entirely Christian. \
\
- History of Spanish Empire begins with Ferdinand and Isabella in the late 15th century \
 - Currently, in 1350, Castile and Aragon are still almost at the point of conquest, but for 100 years there\'92s a lull in the consolidation\
  - Happens due to a civil wars/skirmishes/dynastic struggles between Castile and Aragon \
  - Coming together of Castile and Aragon after a century of civil struggles\
   - Become a very potent European power. \
\
- Gothic Cathedrals emphasize the imposition of Spanish power in the Islamic World. Act as bastions of Spanish, Christian power. \
 - Enormous structures. \
 - Gothic Cathedrals took over a century to build, becoming large parts of a city\'92s identity, marks of pride\
 - Represent the power of bishops (and ecclesiastical figures) in Spanish cities of this time period\
  - Bishops were military figures, were parts of the nobility, and grew to be incredibly wealthy \
  - Cathedral represents the center of a physical state that could stretch out hundreds of miles\
   - Bishop of the subject of the king, but has a lot of autonomy - ends up governing over substantial lands, and gain income from these lands\
   - Bishops gain land from conquered territories near them, but also distant from them\
   - Bishops among wealthiest of society - especially due to culture of giving to church, this becomes a major part of the economy of Spain\
    - Church ends up with almost 1/3rd of the land of Spain (buildings just \'93icing on the cake\'94)\
    - By the time of the 15th century/early 16th Century - the Archbishop of Toledo (ranking bishop) is one of the wealthiest man in Spain\
     - Ferdinand and Isabella borrow from him\
     - Has land from Toledo to the eastern coast, and to Portugal. Largest territories of any noblemen in Spain. \
 - Gothic architecture - buttresses supporting interior walls, allowing thinner walls and taller windows - major innovation of Gothic \
 - Planting of Christian monuments on Islamic land\
 - Gothic most popular for a long time.  \
- Lasting sign of reconquest. \
- Universities tended to grow out of schools and cathedrals - leading to Salamanca to build the first university in Spain. \
 - Coimbra - 1308, Lerida - 1300\
 - Universities imply stability and wealth (monarchs endow universities as part of their projects). \
  - Medieval curricula in these colleges - Latin, Theology, Medicine, Music\
   - An intellectual life takes root in Spain where it hadn\'92t before - tribute to the success of Reconquista \
\
\
\
}